---
layout: default
title: Publications

---

# Publications


### peer-reviewed publications

<div> 
<p> <span class="showtooltip" title="article is openly available"><i class="icon-unlock"> </i></span> open access | <span class="showtooltip" title="extra appendices or data available"><i class="icon-archive"> </i></span> appendices/data | <span class="showtooltip" title="click to download"><i class="icon-download-alt"> </i></span> download pdf  </p>

<p> <span class="showtooltip" title="graduate student co-author"><i class="icon-bug"> </i></span> graduate | <span class="showtooltip" title="undergraduate student co-author"><i class="icon-glass"> </i></span> undergraduate student co-authors </p>
</div>


1. **Queenborough, S.A.**, Metz, M.R., Valencia, R. & Wright, S.J. 2013 Demographic consequences of chromatic leaf defence in tropical tree communities - do red young leaves increase growth and survival? Annals of Botany 112, 677-684. Invited contribution to special issue on seedling herbivory. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aob/mct144): 10.1093/aob/mct144 | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="Background. Many tropical forest tree species delay greening their leaves until full expansion. This strategy is thought to provide newly flushing leaves with protection against damage by herbivores by keeping young leaves devoid of nutritive value. Because young leaves suffer the greatest predation from invertebrate herbivores, delayed greening could prevent costly tissue loss. Many species that delay greening also produce anthocyanin pigments in their new leaves, giving them a reddish tint. These anthocyanins may be fungicidal, protect leaves against UV damage or make leaves cryptic to herbivores blind to the red part of the spectrum. Methods A comprehensive survey was undertaken of seedlings, saplings and mature trees in two diverse tropical forests: a rain forest in western Amazonia (Yasuní National Park, Ecuador) and a deciduous forest in Central America (Barro Colorado Island, Panamá). A test was made of whether individuals and species with delayed greening or red-coloured young leaves showed lower mortality or higher relative growth rates than species that did not. Key results At both Yasuní and Barro Colorado Island, species with delayed greening or red young leaves comprised significant proportions of the seedling and tree communities. At both sites, significantly lower mortality was found in seedlings and trees with delayed greening and red-coloured young leaves. While there was little effect of leaf colour on the production of new leaves of seedlings, diameter relative growth rates of small trees were lower in species with delayed greening and red-coloured young leaves than in species with regular green leaves, and this effect remained when the trade-off between mortality and growth was accounted for. Conclusions Herbivores exert strong selection pressure on seedlings for the expression of defence traits. A delayed greening or red-coloured young leaf strategy in seedlings appears to be associated with higher survival for a given growth rate, and may thus influence the species composition of later life stages.
">abstract</a> | <a href="../assets/pubs/2013-Queenborough-AoB-preprint.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a> (preprint)

18. **Queenborough, S.A.**, Humphreys, A.<sup><span class="icon-bug"></span></sup> & Valencia, R. 2013 Sex specific flowering patterns in the understorey rain forest tree *Iryanthera hostmannii* (Myristicaceae). Tropical Conservation Science in press. <span class="icon-unlock"> </span> | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="Sexual dimorphism in dioecious plants is a common phenomenon that has received widespread attention, yet  the implications for reproductive function and fitness remain poorly understood. Using data from a long-term study of a population of 839 dioecious Iryanthera hostmannii (Myristicaceae) trees in a large permanent plot in a lowland tropical rain forest, we examined the effects of greater investment in reproduction by females compared to males for various aspects of life history. Although male trees often produced more inflorescences than females, total dry mass of flowers was roughly equal in two out of three years for both sexes, implying that any investment differential lies in fruit production. There was no difference in the 12-year relative growth rate of males and females, suggesting that females can compensate somehow for their greater
 reproductive investment, although there were weak suggestions that mortality might have been greater in females. Male flowers opened slightly earlier in the day than female flowers, and were short-lived, lasting at most two nights compared to up to four nights in females. Understanding the interacting effects of resource availability (studied here) and pollen movement (currently unknown in Iryanthera) on reproduction is essential in terms of life history theory. Knowledge of reproductive biology is key in considering the ecology and conservation of tropical forest communities.">abstract</a> | <span class="icon-download-alt"></span>

17. Callinger, K.M.<sup><span class="icon-bug"></span></sup>, Curtis, P.S. & **Queenborough, S.A.** 2013 Herbarium specimens reveal the footprint of climate change on flowering trends across north-central North America. Ecology Letters. in press. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ele.12135): 10.1111/ele.12135  <span class="icon-unlock"> </span> | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="Shifting flowering phenology with rising temperatures is occurring worldwide, but the rarity of co-occurring long-term observational and temperature records has hindered the evaluation of phenological responsiveness in many species and across large spatial scales. We used herbarium specimens combined with historic temperature data to examine the impact of climate change on flowering trends in 141 species collected across 116,000 km2 in north-central North America. On average, date of maximum flowering advanced 2.4 days °C−1, although species-specific responses varied from − 13.5 to + 7.3 days °C−1. Plant functional types exhibited distinct patterns of phenological responsiveness with significant differences between native and introduced species, among flowering seasons, and between wind- and biotically pollinated species. This study is the first to assess large-scale patterns of phenological responsiveness with broad species representation and is an important step towards understanding current and future impacts of climate change on species performance and biodiversity.">abstract</a> | <a href="../assets/pubs/2013-Callinger-ELE.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

16. Cooke, I.R., Mattison, E.H., Audsley, E., Bailey, A., Freckleton, R.P., Graves, A.R., Morris, J., **Queenborough, S.A.**, Sanders, D.L., Sirawarden, G., Trawick, P., Watkinson, A.R., & Sutherland, W.J. 2013 Empirical test of an agricultural landscape model: the importance of farmer preference for risk-aversion and crop complexity. SAGE Open. Vol. 3, no. 2 2158244013486491. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/2158244013486491): 10.1177/2158244013486491  <span class="icon-unlock"> </span> | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="Developing models to predict the effects of social and economic change on agricultural landscapes is an important challenge. Model development often involves making decisions about which aspects of the system require detailed description and which are reasonably insensitive to the assumptions. However, important components of the system are often left out because parameter estimates are unavailable. In particular, measurements of the relative influence of different objectives, such as risk, environmental management, on farmer decision making, have proven difficult to quantify. We describe a model that can make predictions of land use on the basis of profit alone or with the inclusion of explicit additional objectives. Importantly, our model is specifically designed to use parameter estimates for additional objectives obtained via farmer interviews. By statistically comparing the outputs of this model with a large farm-level land-use data set, we show that cropping patterns in the United Kingdom contain a significant contribution from farmer’s preference for objectives other than profit. In particular, we found that risk aversion had an effect on the accuracy of model predictions, whereas preference for a particular number of crops grown was less important. While nonprofit objectives have frequently been identified as factors in farmers’ decision making, our results take this analysis further by demonstrating the relationship between these preferences and actual cropping patterns. ">abstract</a> |  <a href="../assets/pubs/2013-Cooke-SAGE.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

15. Jimenez, A.G., Harper, J.M., **Queenborough, S.A.** & Williams, J.B. 2013 Linkages between the life-history evolution of tropical and temperate birds and the resistance of the cells to oxidative and non-oxidative chemical injury. Journal of Experimental Biology 216, 1373-1380. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1242/jeb.079889): 10.1242/​jeb.079889. | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="A fundamental challenge facing physiological ecologists is to understand how variation in life history at the whole-organism level might be linked to cellular function. Thus, because tropical birds have higher annual survival and lower rates of metabolism, we hypothesized that cells from tropical species would have greater cellular resistance to chemical injury than cells from temperate species. We cultured dermal fibroblasts from 26 tropical and 26 temperate species of birds and examined cellular resistance to cadmium, H2O2, paraquat, thapsigargin, tunicamycium, methane methylsulfonate (MMS) and UV light. Using ANCOVA, we found that the values for the dose that killed 50% of cells (LD50) from tropical birds were significantly higher for H2O2 and MMS. When we tested for significance using a generalized least squares approach accounting for phylogenetic relationships among species to model LD50, we found that cells from tropical birds had greater tolerance for Cd, H2O2, paraquat, tunicamycin and MMS than cells from temperate birds. In contrast, tropical birds showed either lower or no difference in tolerance to thapsigargin and UV light in comparison with temperate birds. These findings are consistent with the idea that natural selection has uniquely fashioned cells of long-lived tropical bird species to be more resistant to forms of oxidative and non-oxidative stress than cells from shorter-lived temperate species. ">abstract</a> | <a href="../assets/pubs/2013-Jimenez-JEB.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a> 

14. **Queenborough, S.A.** & Porras, C.M.<sup><span class="icon-glass"></span></sup> 2013 Expanding coverage of plant trait databases - a comparison of specific leaf area from fresh and dried leaves. Plant Ecology & Diversity, online early. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17550874.2013.777483): 10.1080/17550874.2013.777483. | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="Background: Specific leaf area (SLA) is a key plant functional trait, related to leaf life span, nutrient concentrations and photosynthetic rates, among other factors. However, a limiting factor in measuring these traits is that they are taken from fresh leaves. If accurate SLA measurements could be extracted from dried herbarium specimens, values for many more species could be rapidly included in large trait databases.
Aims: To determine whether artificial drying of leaves could influence subsequent calculations of SLA compared to calculations using fresh leaf area.
Methods: Using data from 449 leaves from 123 tropical species, we compared leaf area and SLA of fresh leaves with leaf area and SLA of the same leaves following standard pressing and drying procedures. Drying was carried out in the field using an electric heater.
Results: We found a significant decrease in leaf area following pressing and artificial drying (mean decrease = 8%), but that this effect was less in larger leaves. This decrease in leaf area had no statistically significant effect on calculations of SLA for all species pooled. Comparing plant families, however, we found a significant variation in leaf area decrease (0–30%).
Conclusions: We recommend that researchers continue to follow the established protocol for SLA measurements. However, given the benefits of increasing coverage of trait databases we suggest that herbarium specimens could be included, provided shrinkage is quantified and is less than the wide range of between-species variations already documented.">abstract</a> |  <a href="../assets/pubs/2013-Queenborough-TPED.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

13. Curtis, P.S. & **Queenborough, S.A.** 2012 Commentary: Raising the standards for ecological meta-analysis. New Phytologist 195, 279-281. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2012.04207.x): 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2012.04207.x  | <a href="../assets/pubs/2012-Curtis-NewPhyt.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

12. Bai, X.<sup><span class="icon-bug"></span></sup>, **Queenborough, S.A.**, Wang, X., Zhang, J., Yuan, Z., Xing, D. & Hao, Z. 2012 Effects of local biotic neighbours and habitat heterogeneity on tree and shrub seedling survival in an old-growth temperate forest. Oecologia 170, 755-765. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00442-012-2348-2): 10.1007/s00442-012-2348-2 | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="Seedling dynamics play a crucial role in determining species distributions and coexistence. Exploring causes of variation in seedling dynamics can therefore provide key insights into the factors affecting these phenomena. We examined the relative importance of biotic neighborhood processes and habitat heterogeneity using survival data for 5,827 seedlings in 39 tree and shrub species over 2 years from an old-growth temperate forest in northeastern China. We found significant negative density-dependence effects on survival of tree seedlings, and limited effects of habitat heterogeneity (edaphic and topographic variables) on survival of shrub seedlings. The importance of negative density dependence on young tree seedling survival was replaced by habitat in tree seedlings ≥4 years old. As expected, negative density dependence was more apparent in gravity-dispersed species compared to wind-dispersed and animal-dispersed species. Moreover, we found that a community compensatory trend existed for trees. Therefore, although negative density dependence was not as pervasive as in other forest communities, it is an important mechanism for the maintenance of community diversity in this temperate forest. We conclude that both negative density dependence and habitat heterogeneity drive seedling survival, but their relative importance varies with seedling age classes and species traits.">abstract</a> |  <a href="../assets/pubs/2012-Bai-Oecologia.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

11. **Queenborough, S.A.**, Metz, M.R., Wiegand, T. & Valencia, R. 2012 Palms, peccaries and perturbations: widespread effects of small-scale disturbance in tropical forests. BMC Ecology 12, 3. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1472-6785-12-3): 10.1186/1472-6785-12-3  <span class="icon-unlock"> </span> | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="Background. Disturbance is an important process structuring ecosystems worldwide and has long been thought to be a significant driver of diversity and dynamics. In forests, most studies of disturbance have focused on large-scale disturbance such as hurricanes or tree-falls. However, smaller sub-canopy disturbances could also have significant impacts on community structure. One such sub-canopy disturbance in tropical forests is abscising leaves of large arborescent palm (Arececeae) trees. These leaves can weigh up to 15 kg and cause physical damage and mortality to juvenile plants. Previous studies examining this question suffered from the use of static data at small spatial scales. Here we use data from a large permanent forest plot combined with dynamic data on the survival and growth of > 66,000 individuals over a seven-year period to address whether falling palm fronds do impact neighboring seedling and sapling communities, or whether there is an interaction between the palms and peccaries rooting for fallen palm fruit in the same area as falling leaves. We tested the wider generalisation of these hypotheses by comparing seedling and sapling survival under fruiting and non-fruiting trees in another family, the Myristicaceae.
Results. We found a spatially-restricted but significant effect of large arborescent fruiting palms on the spatial structure, population dynamics and species diversity of neighbouring sapling and seedling communities. However, these effects were not found around slightly smaller non-fruiting palm trees, suggesting it is seed predators such as peccaries rather than falling leaves that impact on the communities around palm trees. Conversely, this hypothesis was not supported in data from other edible species, such as those in the family Myristicaceae.
Conclusions. Given the abundance of arborescent palm trees in Amazonian forests, it is reasonable to conclude that their presence does have a significant, if spatially-restricted, impact on juvenile plants, most likely on the survival and growth of seedlings and saplings damaged by foraging peccaries. Given the abundance of fruit produced by each palm, the widespread effects of these small-scale disturbances appear, over long time-scales, to cause directional changes in community structure at larger scales.
">abstract</a> |  <a href="../assets/pubs/2012-Queenborough-BMC.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

10. Gao, J.<sup><span class="icon-bug"></span></sup>, **Queenborough, S.A.** & Chai, J. 2012 Flowering sex ratios and spatial distribution of dioecious trees in a SE Asian seasonal rain forest. Journal of Tropical Forest Science 24, 517-527.  <span class="icon-unlock"> </span> | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="Few studies have investigated multiple dioecious species at the community level. We, therefore, documented flowering sex ratios and analysed the relative spatial
distributions of males and females in a diverse suite of tree species in a little-studied tropical forest in
Xishuangbanna, south-western China. Male-biased sex ratios were common. Population-level male-biased sex
ratios were found in four of the eight species studied and female-biased sex ratios in one. Significant male-
biased sex ratios were found in at least one size class in all eight species. Male bias was caused by the onset of
flowering at smaller sizes in males than females in four species. Male and female individuals had random to
aggregated spatial distributions relative to each other. We concluded that similar selection pressures drove
the evolution and ecology of dioecious species in many forest ecosystems
">abstract</a> | <a href="../assets/pubs/2012-Gao-JTFS.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

9. **Queenborough, S.A.**, Burnet, K.M.<sup><span class="icon-bug"></span></sup>, Sutherland, W.J., Watkinson, A.R. & Freckleton, R.P. 2011 From meso- to macro-scale population dynamics: a density structured approach. Methods in Ecology & Evolution 2, 289-302. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.2041-210X.2010.00075.x): 10.1111/j.2041-210X.2010.00075.x | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="1. To predict how plant populations may respond to changes in the environment or management, it is necessary to quantify the factors influencing their population dynamics and distributions over large spatial and/or temporal scales. 2. Most studies of plant population dynamics monitor demography at the sub-metre scale. Extrapolation or prediction from these studies is difficult because the data are sparse, parameter error cannot be ascertained and the data may not cover the range of expected environmental conditions. 3. Here, we describe a survey method based on density-structured models. These models use a discrete density state variable and model rates of transition between density states. Although analytically simple, these models are empirically useful as they may be parameterized using readily collected data. They also offer an empirical link between meso-scale and macro-scale population dynamics. 4. For a large-scale study on annual weeds, we describe the rapid estimation of densities using relatively coarse density estimates using visual estimates of density. Using information from detailed surveys, we describe how we use the method to measure populations of annual plants to a scale of 20 × 20 m in areas of up to 4 ha per population within 500 different arable fields over 3 years. 5. We show that the approach taken is repeatable within and among observers, and we quantify the degree of measurement error. We give examples of the resultant data, and compare these with the data obtained from nested small-scale plots. Finally, we show how the information from this type of survey can be incorporated into population models and used to measure within-population and inter-annual flux.">abstract</a> |  <a href="../assets/pubs/2011-Queenborough-MEE.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

8. Freckleton, R.P., Sutherland, W.J., Watkinson, A.J. & **Queenborough, S.A.** 2011 Density structured models for plant population dynamics. American Naturalist 177, 1-17. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/657621): 10.1086/657621 | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="Density‐structured models are structured population models in which the state variable is the proportion of populations or sites in a small number of discrete density states. Although such models have rarely been used, they have the advantage that they are straightforward to parameterize, make few assumptions about population dynamics, and permit rapid data collection using coarse density assessment. In this article, we highlight their use in relating population dynamics to environmental variation and their robustness to measurement error. We show that density‐structured models are able to accurately represent population dynamics under a wide range of conditions. We look at the effects of including a persistent seedbank and describe numerical approximations for the mean and variance of population size. For simulated data, we determine the extent to which the underlying continuous process may be inferred from density‐structured data. Finally, we discuss issues of parameter estimation and applications for which these types of models may be useful.">abstract</a> |  <a href="../assets/pubs/2011-Freckleton-AmNat.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

7. Vamosi, S.M. & **Queenborough, S.A.** 2010 Breeding systems, phylogenetic diversity and abundance along a large-scale elevational gradient. Journal of Biogeography 37, 465-476. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2699.2009.02214.x): 10.1111/j.1365-2699.2009.02214.x | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="Aim  The factors affecting the distribution of dioecious species have received surprisingly little attention and, as a consequence, are poorly understood. For example, there is a well-documented negative association between dioecy and latitude, for which we have no candidate mechanisms. Conversely, it has been suggested that the relative proportion of dioecious species should be positively correlated with changes in elevation. Location  Costa Rica, Central America. Methods  We made use of data on the distribution of 175 seed plant species from a series of plots along a transect in Costa Rica that ranged from 30 to 2600 m a.s.l. to test the prediction that dioecy is correlated with elevation. Specifically, we examined relationships between the proportion of dioecy, at the species and individual levels, and the elevation, species richness, number of individuals, and phylogenetic diversity (PD) of plots. For comparison, we repeated all analyses with monoecious species, which also have unisexual flowers but do not suffer from reduced mate assurance and the seed shadow effect that may be the outcomes of having spatially separated sexes. Results  The relative proportions of dioecious species and individuals displayed a unimodal relationship with elevation, both peaking at 750 m a.s.l. In contrast, the relative proportions of monoecious species and individuals displayed negative associations with elevation. In addition, the proportion of dioecious species was significantly positively associated with species richness and with the PD of plots. The proportion of monoecious species was not associated with species richness and was weakly positively associated with the PD of plots. Main conclusions  Our results suggest that the selection pressure of elevation on the pollinators and life-history strategy of dioecious species is much less than expected, and is overshadowed by the as-yet unexplained correlation of dioecy with species richness. Additional studies of the ecology of cosexual and unisexual (i.e. dioecious and monoecious) species along large environmental gradients are needed.">abstract</a> | <a href="../assets/pubs/2010-Vamosi-JBiogeog.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

6. **Queenborough, S.A.**, Burslem, D.F.R.P., Garwood, N.C., Valencia, R. 2009 Taxonomic scale of niche partitioning and local neighbourhood effects on survival of tropical tree seedlings. Proceedings of the Royal Society, B. 276, 4197-4205. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2009.0921): 10.1098/rspb.2009.0921 | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="In order to differentiate between mechanisms of species coexistence, we examined the relative importance of local biotic neighbourhood, abiotic habitat factors and species differences as factors influencing the survival of 2330 spatially mapped tropical tree seedlings of 15 species of Myristicaceae in two separate analyses in which individuals were identified first to species and then to genus. Using likelihood methods, we selected the most parsimonious candidate models as predictors of 3 year seedling survival in both sets of analyses. We found evidence for differential effects of abiotic niche and neighbourhood processes on individual survival between analyses at the genus and species levels. Niche partitioning (defined as an interaction of taxonomic identity and abiotic neighbourhood) was significant in analyses at the genus level, but did not differentiate among species in models of individual seedling survival. By contrast, conspecific and congeneric seedling and adult density were retained in the minimum adequate models of seedling survival at species and genus levels, respectively. We conclude that abiotic niche effects express differences in seedling survival among genera but not among species, and that, within genera, community and/or local variation in adult and seedling abundance drives variation in seedling survival. These data suggest that different mechanisms of coexistence among tropical tree taxa may function at different taxonomic or phylogenetic scales. This perspective helps to reconcile perceived differences of importance in the various non-mutually exclusive mechanisms of species coexistence in hyper-diverse tropical forests. ">abstract</a> | <a href="../assets/pubs/2009-Queenborough-ProcRoySocB.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>


5. **Queenborough, S.A.**, Mazer, S.J., Vamosi, S.M., Garwood, N.C., Valencia, R. & Freckleton, R. 2009 Seed mass, abundance and breeding system among tropical forest species: do dioecious species exhibit compensatory reproduction or abundances? Journal of Ecology 97, 555-566. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2745.2009.01485.x): 10.1111/j.1365-2745.2009.01485.x | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-html="true" data-content="1. Dioecious species may suffer a reproductive handicap compared to sympatric cosexual (hermaphroditic or monoecious) species of equal abundance simply because populations of dioecious species contain fewer seed-producing individuals. To compensate for this population-level disadvantage, natural selection in dioecious populations should favour females that reallocate those reproductive resources, that in cosexual individuals are invested in male function, towards the production of higher quality or more seeds, potentially leading to a higher density of established individuals. 2. We tested for two compensatory fitness advantages (heavier seeds and higher population densities) in dioecious species in the flora of a high-diversity tropical forest in Western Amazonia. Using a phylogenetically corrected generalized linear modelling approach, we examined the phylogenetic dependence (Pagel's λ) of seed mass, abundance, growth form and wood-specific gravity for 641 species from Yasuní National Park, Ecuador. Seed mass was highly correlated with phylogeny, but abundance was not. We then used AIC values to test for models (including breeding system) that best explained seed mass and species abundance, using the maximum likelihood values of λ. 3. Contrary to expectations, dioecious species exhibited no advantage with respect to either seed mass or population density; there was no difference in mean seed mass or abundance between dioecious species and their most closely related cosexual species. 4. We compared our results with those from a similar forest in the Tambopata Wildlife Reserve, Peru. There, dioecious shrubs had larger seeds than hermaphroditic shrubs, but (as for Yasuní) there was no difference between breeding systems in seed size among trees. Differences in the composition of species sampled may have contributed to differences in the results between the two sites. 5. We suggest that other individual fitness advantages, such as reduced inbreeding, increased dispersal, superior seed quality (e.g. better defences) or increased seed number contribute to the persistence of dioecious populations at Yasuní. 6. Synthesis. Similarities in the statistical models of seed mass and abundance for plant species in a Western Amazonian rain forest indicate that selective pressures on the seed-producing individuals are similar, despite variation in sexual system. Therefore, breeding system may play a more limited role in community assembly of tropical forests than was previously considered.">abstract</a> |  <a href="../assets/pubs/2009-Queenborough-JEcol.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

4. Cooke, I.R., **Queenborough, S.A.**, Mattison, E.H.A., Bailey, A.P., Sandars, D.L., Graves, A.R., Morris, J., Atkinson, P.W., Trawick, P., Freckleton, R.P., Watkinson, A.R., & Sutherland, W.J. 2009 Integrating socio-economics and ecology: a review of applications and approaches. Journal of Applied Ecology 46, 269-277. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2009.01615.x): 10.1111/j.1365-2664.2009.01615.x  | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="1. Answering many of the critical questions in conservation, development and environmental management requires integrating the social and natural sciences. However, understanding the array of available quantitative methods and their associated terminology presents a major barrier to successful collaboration. 2. We provide an overview of quantitative socio-economic methods that distils their complexity into a simple taxonomy. We outline how each has been used in conjunction with ecological models to address questions relating to the management of socio-ecological systems. 3. We review the application of social and ecological quantitative concepts to agro-ecology and classify the approaches used to integrate the two disciplines. Our review included all published integrated models from 2003 to 2008 in 27 journals that publish agricultural modelling research. Although our focus is on agro-ecology, many of the results are broadly applicable to other fields involving an interaction between human activities and ecology. 4. We found 36 papers that integrated social and ecological concepts in a quantitative model. Four different approaches to integration were used, depending on the scale at which human welfare was quantified. Most models viewed humans as pure profit maximizers, both when calculating welfare and predicting behaviour. 5. Synthesis and applications. We reached two main conclusions based on our taxonomy and review. The first is that quantitative methods that extend predictions of behaviour and measurements of welfare beyond a simple market value basis are underutilized by integrated models. The second is that the accuracy of prediction for integrated models remains largely unquantified. Addressing both problems requires researchers to reach a common understanding of modelling goals and data requirements during the early stages of a project.">abstract</a> |  <a href="../assets/pubs/2009-Cooke-JAE.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

3. **Queenborough, S.A.**, Burslem, D.F.R.P., Garwood, N.C., Valencia, R. 2007 Neighborhood and community interactions determine the spatial pattern of tropical tree seedling survival. Ecology 88, 2248-2258. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1890/06-0737.1): 10.1890/06-0737.1  | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover"  data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="Factors affecting survival and recruitment of 3531 individually mapped seedlings of Myristicaceae were examined over three years in a highly diverse neotropical rain forest, at spatial scales of 1–9 m and 25 ha. We found convincing evidence of a community compensatory trend (CCT) in seedling survival (i.e., more abundant species had higher seedling mortality at the 25-ha scale), which suggests that density-dependent mortality may contribute to the spatial dynamics of seedling recruitment. Unlike previous studies, we demonstrate that the CCT was not caused by differences in microhabitat preferences or life history strategy among the study species. In local neighborhood analyses, the spatial autocorrelation of seedling survival was important at small spatial scales (1–5 m) but decayed rapidly with increasing distance. Relative seedling height had the greatest effect on seedling survival. Conspecific seedling density had a more negative effect on survival than heterospecific seedling density and was stronger and extended farther in rare species than in common species. Taken together, the CCT and neighborhood analyses suggest that seedling mortality is coupled more strongly to the landscape-scale abundance of conspecific large trees in common species and the local density of conspecific seedlings in rare species. We conclude that negative density dependence could promote species coexistence in this rain forest community but that the scale dependence of interactions differs between rare and common species.">abstract</a> | <a href="http://esapubs.org/archive/ecol/E088/135/"> <span class="showtooltip" title="ESA Appendices"> <i class="icon-archive"> </i> </span></a> <a href="../assets/pubs/2007-Queenborough-Ecology.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

2. **Queenborough, S.A.**, Burslem, D.F.R.P., Garwood, N.C., Valencia, R. 2007 Determinants of biased sex ratios and differential costs of reproduction in dioecious tropical forest trees. American Journal of Botany 94, 67-78. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.3732/ajb.94.1.67): 10.3732/ajb.94.1.67 | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="Estimates of the sex ratio and cost of reproduction in plant populations have implications for resource use by animals, reserve design, and mechanisms of species coexistence, but may be biased unless all potentially reproductive individuals are censused over several flowering seasons. To investigate mechanisms maintaining dioecy in tropical forest trees, we recorded the flowering activity, sexual expression, and reproductive effort of all 2209 potentially reproductive individuals within 16 species of Myristicaceae over 4 years on a large forest plot in Amazonian Ecuador. Female trees invested >10 times more biomass than males in total reproduction. Flowering sex ratios were male-biased in four species in ≥1 year, and cumulative 4-year sex ratios were male-biased in two species and for the whole family, but different mechanisms were responsible for this in different species. Annual growth rates were equivalent for both sexes, implying that females can compensate for their greater reproductive investment. There was no strict spatial segregation of the sexes, but females were more often associated with specific habitats than males. We conclude that male-biased sex ratios are not manifested uniformly even after exhaustive sampling and that the mechanisms balancing the higher cost of female reproduction are extremely variable.">abstract</a> |  <a href="../assets/pubs/2007-Queenborough-AmJBot.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

1. **Queenborough, S.A.**, Burslem, D.F.R.P., Garwood, N.C., Valencia, R. 2007 Habitat niche partitioning by 16 species of Myristicaceae in Amazonian Ecuador. Plant Ecology 192, 193-207. [doi](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11258-007-9328-3): 10.1007/s11258-007-9328-3 | <a class="btn btn-mini" href="#" rel="popover" data-placement="bottom" data-original-title="Abstract" data-content="The distribution and spatial pattern of plants in tropical forests have important implications for how species interact with each other and their environments. In this article we use a large-scale permanent census plot to address if the coexistence of 16 co-occurring species of Myristicaceae is aided by topographic and light gradient niche partitioning. We used a second order spatial pattern analysis based on Ripley’s K function to describe species’ distributions and associations among species, and a torus translation procedure to test for associations with three topographically defined habitats. A majority of species displayed spatial aggregation and over half had one or more significant habitat associations. Four species were associated with the ridge habitat, four species with slope habitat, and two with valley habitat. Seven other species showed no habitat association. Within each habitat group, species exhibited a variety of distributions in relation to light availability. However, habitat associations were largely unexplained by differential rates of mortality, growth or recruitment over a 5-year interval. We conclude that although in principle partitioning of the topographic and light environments may double or treble the number of species able to coexist, there is no evidence that partitioning of physical habitats can explain the coexistence of all 16 of these closely related species.">abstract</a> |   <a href="../assets/pubs/2007-Queenborough-PlEcol.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

<hr>

### in review

1. Liza S. Comita, **Queenborough, S.A.**, Eck, J.L.<sup><span class="icon-bug"></span></sup>, Murphy, S.<sup><span class="icon-bug"></span></sup>, Xu, K.<sup><span class="icon-glass"></span></sup>, Krishnadas, M.<sup><span class="icon-bug"></span></sup>, Beckman, N. and Zhu, Y. Testing predictions of the Janzen-Connell hypothesis: A meta-analysis of experimental evidence for distance- and density-dependent seed and seedling survival. Journal of Ecology.

1. Boudouris, J.<sup><span class="icon-glass"></span></sup> & **Queenborough, S.A.** Diversity and distribution of extra-floral nectaries in the cerrado savanna vegetation of Brazil. PeerJ.

2. Muehleisen, M.<sup><span class="icon-glass"></span></sup>, **Queenborough, S.A.**, Alvia Zambano, L.P., Valencia, R. & Fiala, B. Incidence of extra-floral nectaries and their relationship to growth and survival of lowland tropical rain forest trees. Journal of Ecology.

3. Amano, T., Freckleton, R.F.P, **Queenborough, S.A.**, Doxford, S.W.<sup><span class="icon-bug"></span></sup>, Smithers, R.J., Sparks, T.H. & Sutherland, W.J. Phenological responses to warming determine changes in niche over space and time. Proceedings of the Royal Society, B.

4. Hellmann, J.K.<sup><span class="icon-bug"></span></sup>, Erikson, J.S. & **Queenborough, S.A.** Evaluating macroinvertebrate community shifts in the nexus of freestone and limestone streams. Ecological Complexity.

<hr>


### non peer-reviewed publications

1. **Queenborough, S.A.** 2012 The habits of successful ecologists: How to write right, right!? Bulletin of the British Ecological Society 44 (2), 36-38.  <a href="../assets/pubs/bes-bulletin/2012-BESbulletin-writing.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a> 

7. **Queenborough, S.A.** 2011 The habits of successful ecologists: time management. Bulletin of the British Ecological Society 42 (3) 34-37.  <a href="../assets/pubs/bes-bulletin/2011-BESbulletin-time.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a> 

6. **Queenborough, S.A.** & Parker, J.N. 2011 The habits of successful ecologists: learning from the best. Bulletin of the British Ecological Society 43, 31-34.  <a href="../assets/pubs/bes-bulletin/2011-BESbulletin-highlycited.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a> 

5. **Queenborough, S.A.** & Cooke, I.R. 2011 The habits of successful ecologists, or Does Facebook count as outreach? Bulletin of the British Ecological Society 42 (1), 40-42. <a href="../assets/pubs/bes-bulletin/2011-BESbulletin-productivity.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

4. Sutherland, W.J. et al. 2010 Is wildlife conservation compatible with arable farming? Evaluating the options for sustainable agriculture. RELU Policy and Practice Notes 23, December 2010.  <a href="../assets/pubs/policy-notes/2010-Sutherland_RELU_policynote23.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

4. **Queenborough, S.A.** & Comita, L.S. 2010 Should Ecological Science Be Ethical? Union Seminary Quarterly Review 63, 18-25. <span class="icon-unlock"></span>  <a href="../assets/pubs/2010-Queenborough-USQR-ethics.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

3. **Queenborough, S.A.**, Cooke, I.R. & Schildhauer, M.P. 2010 Do we need an Eco-Bank? The ecology of data-sharing. Bulletin of the British Ecological Society 41 (3), 32-35. <a href="../assets/pubs/bes-bulletin/2010-BESbulletin-datasharing.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a>

2. **Queenborough, S.A.** & Cooke, I.R. 2010 Do humans count in ecology? Quantitative methods can link socio-economics and ecology. Bulletin of the British Ecological Society 41 (1), 57-58. <a href="../assets/pubs/bes-bulletin/2010-BESbulletin-socioecology.pdf"><span class="icon-download-alt"></span></a> 

1. **Queenborough, S.A.** 2007 Book review of Forest Ecology and Conservation. A handbook of techniques. Newton, A.C. (2007) OUP. In Environmental Conservation 34, 2-3.


